# Chapter 10 - Aspect-Oriented Programming by Design

**DEFINITION** - Aspect-Oriented Programming aims to reduce boilerplate code required for implementing Cross-Cutting Concerns and other coding patterns. It does this by implementing such patterns in a single place and applying them to a code base either declaratively or based on convention, without modifying the code itself.

**NOTE** - AOP as a paradigm focuses on working around the problem of *repetition.*

## AOP Methods

**SOLID** - Applies aspects using Decorators around reusable Abstractions defined for groups of classes based on their behavior.

Advantages
- Doesn’t require any tooling.
- Aspects are easy to implement.
- Focuses on design.
- Makes the system more maintainable.

Disadvantages
- Not always easy to apply in legacy systems.

**Dynamic Interception** - Causes the runtime generation of Decorators based on the application’s Abstractions. These Decorators are injected with tool-specific aspects, called Interceptors.

Advantages
- Easy to add to existing or legacy applications with relatively little changes, assuming the application already programs to interfaces.
- Keeps the compiled application decoupled from the used dynamic Interceptionlibrary
- Good tooling is freely available.

Disadvantages
- Causes aspects to be strongly coupled to the AOP tool.
- Loses compile-time support.
- Causes the convention to be fragile and error prone.

**Compile-time weaving** - Aspects are added to an application in a post-compilation process. The most common form is IL weaving, where an external tool reads the compiled assembly, modifies it by applying the aspects, and replaces the original assembly with the modified one.

Advantages
- Easy to add to existing or legacy applications with relatively few changes, even if the application doesn’t program to interfaces.

Disadvantages
- Injecting Volatile Dependencies into aspects causes Temporal Coupling or Interdependent Tests.
- Aspects are woven in at compile time, making it impossible to call code without the aspect applied. This complicates testing and reduces flexibility.
- Compile-time weaving is the antithesis of DI.

## The SOLID Principles

### Single Responsibility Principle (SRP)

Every class should have a single reason to change. Violating this principle causes classes to become more complex and harder to test and maintain.

More often than not, however, it can be challenging to see whether a class has multiple reasons to change. What can help in this respect is looking at the SRP from the perspective of cohesion. **Cohesion** is defined as the functional relatedness of the elements of a class or module. The lower the amount of relatedness, the lower the cohesion; and the lower the cohesion, the greater the possibility a class violates the SRP. In section 10.3, we’ll discuss cohesion with a concrete example.

### Open/Closed Principle (OCP)

 The OCP prescribes an application design that prevents you from having to make sweeping changes throughout the code base; or, in the vocabulary of the OCP, a class should be open for extension, but closed for modification. A developer should be able to extend the functionality of a system without needing to modify the source code of any existing classes.

 Because they both try to prevent sweeping changes, there’s a strong relationship between the OCP principle and the Don’t Repeat Yourself (DRY) principle. OCP, however, focuses on code, whereas DRY focuses on knowledge.

 **Don't Repeat Yourself (DRY)** - Every piece of knowledge must have a single, unambiguous, authoritative representation within a system.

 ### Liskov Substitution Principle (LSP)

The LSP is a foundation of DI. When consumers don’t observe it, there’s little advantage in injecting Dependencies, because you can’t replace them at will, and you’ll lose many (if not all) benefits of DI.

### Interface Segregation Principle (ISP)

ISP promotes the use of fine-grained Abstractions, rather than wide Abstractions. Any time a consumer depends on an Abstraction where some of its members are unused, the ISP is violated.

### Dependency Inversion Principle (DIP)

The principle states that you should program against Abstractions, and that the consuming layer should be in control of the shape of a consumed Abstraction. The consumer should be able to define the Abstraction in a way that benefits itself the most. If you find yourself adding members to an interface to satisfy the needs of other, specific implementations — including potential future implementations — then you’re almost certainly violating the DIP.

### SOLID as a driver for AOP

The primary aim of AOP is to keep your Cross-Cutting Concerns DRY.

A common misconception, however, is that AOP requires tooling. AOP tool vendors are all to eager to keep this fallacy alive. Our preferred approach is to practice AOP by design, which means you apply patterns and principles first, before reverting to specialized AOP tooling like dynamic Interception libraries.

**NOTE** The more experience you have in the application’s domain and with software development, in general, the more likely you are to make good predictions about future changes. That’s why it’s typically difficult to get the design right immediately when starting a project.

**NOTE** The amount of changes you need to make to the existing Decorators grows proportionally with the amount of features in the system. This makes adding new aspects and features more expensive over time, up to the point that adding features becomes too costly.

## Command-Query Separation

Command-Query Separation (CQS) was coined by Bertrand Meyer in Object-Oriented Software Construction (ISE Inc., 1988). CQS has become an influential object-oriented principle that promotes the idea that each method should either

- Return a result, but not change the observable state of the system
- Change the state, but not produce any value
- Meyer called the value-producing methods queries and the state-changing methods commands. The idea behind this separation is that methods become easier to reason about when they’re either a query or a command, but not both.

**DEFINITION** A *Parameter Object* is a group of parameters that naturally go together.

**TIP** It’s perfectly fine for command Parameter Objects to have a single parameter — or even no parameters at all.

**IMPORTANT** Although this refactoring increases the number of files in the project, assuming that each class and interface gets its own file in the project, you didn’t change the executable code. Every method still contains the same amount of code as before. You gave each use case its own data object, and each class now handles a single use case.

### TransactionScope

The System.Transactions.TransactionScope class of the System.Transactions.dll lets you wrap any arbitrary piece of code in a transaction. Any DbTransaction created during the lifetime of that scope is automatically enlisted in the same transaction. This is a powerful concept that makes it possible to apply transactions to multiple pieces of code that belong to the same business operation, without having to pass along transactions through the call stack.

Compared to the full .NET framework, .NET Core doesn’t support distributed transactions, because this requires the Microsoft Distributed Transaction Coordinator (MSDTC) service, which has no equivalent on platforms other than Windows. This is an advantage, because we feel that, in general, distributed transactions should be prevented anyway. With .NET Core, however, you can still use TransactionScope to enlist operations in a transaction to a single data source.

---

Some developers argue against having this many classes in their system, because they feel it complicates navigating through the project. This, however, only happens when you don’t structure your project properly. In this example, all product-related operations can be placed in a namespace called MyApp.Services.Products, effectively grouping those operations together, similar to what Mary’s IProductService did. Instead of having the grouping at the class level, you now have it at the project level, which is a great benefit, because the project structure immediately shows you the application’s behavior.

**NOTE** DI Containers compose object graphs based on the type information retrieved from the type’s constructor arguments. Because their primary method for Object Composition is based on this, DI Containers are bad for handling ambiguous Abstractions. LSP violations, therefore, tend to complicate your Composition Root when using a DI Container. Or, put differently, the use of a DI Container makes LSP violations more obvious, just as Constructor Injection makes SRP violations more obvious.

**DEFINITION** A passive attribute provides metadata rather than behavior. Passive attributes prevent the Control Freak anti-pattern, because aspect attributes that include behavior are often Volatile Dependencies.13

**TIP** Prefer creating a domain-specific attribute over reusing an attribute that’s tied to a specific framework. For instance, if you use the ASP.NET Core’s [Authorize] attribute, that would drag along a dependency to Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authorization.dll, which wouldn’t be appropriate if you were to reuse the domain in, for example, a Windows service application.

### Authorization Flavors

You can specify authorization on commands and other message types in many ways. Here are some ideas:

- If commands are always accessible by a single role, consider placing the command in a namespace that’s named after its role instead of applying an attribute. For instance, you can place administrative commands in the namespace MyApp.Domain.Commands.Administrator and let the Decorator analyze this namespace. This also gives you a nice intuitive project structure because commands are grouped by their permitted role.
- Instead of working with roles, a common model is working with permissions. Permissions allow access to be configured in a more fine-grained manner. A command can be marked with a specific permission. This hard-codes the list of application permissions rather than roles and allows an administrator to manage the link between users, roles, and permissions.
- Next to role-based security, your application might require row-based security. In the context of the e-commerce application, this could mean that certain groups of products can only be managed by users located in certain regions. In other words, even though multiple users might be in the same role, row-based security can still make a specific product accessible to some users in a role, but inaccessible to others from that same role.14