# Chapter 13 - ConfigMaps and Secrets

ConfigMaps are used to provide configuration information for workloads
- Can either be fine-grained information (a short string) or a composite value in the form of a file

Secrets are similar to ConfigMaps but focused on making sensitive information available to the workload

## ConfigMaps

Think of it as
- a k8s object that defines a small filesystem
- a set of variables when defining environment or command line for your containers

ConfigMap is combined with pod right before it's run

Example:

```
# This is a sample config file that I might use to configure an application
parameter1 = value1
parameter2 = value2
```

```
kubectl create configmap my-config \
  --from-file=my-config.txt \
  --from-literal=extra-param=extra-value \
  --from-literal=another-param=another-value
```

```
apiVersion: v1
data:
  another-param: another-value
  extra-param: extra-value
  my-config.txt: |
    # This is a sample config file that I might use to configure an application
    parameter1 = value1
    parameter2 = value2
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: ...
  name: my-config
  namespace: default
  resourceVersion: "13556"
  selfLink: /api/v1/namespaces/default/configmaps/my-config
  uid: 3641c553-f7de-11e6-98c9-06135271a273
```

### Using a ConfigMap

Three ways to use a ConfigMap

1. Filesystem - You can mount a ConfigMap into a Pod. A file is created for each entry based on the key name. The contents of that file are set to the value
2. Environment variable - A ConfigMap can be used to dynamically set the value of an environment variable
3. Command-line argument - Kubernetes supports dynamically creating the command line for a container based on ConfigMap values

Example:

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: kuard-config
spec:
  containers:
    - name: test-container
      image: gcr.io/kuar-demo/kuard-amd64:blue
      imagePullPolicy: Always
      command:
        - "/kuard"
        - "$(EXTRA_PARAM)"
      env:
        - name: ANOTHER_PARAM
          valueFrom:
            configMapKeyRef:
              name: my-config
              key: another-param
        - name: EXTRA_PARAM
          valueFrom:
            configMapKeyRef:
              name: my-config
              key: extra-param
      volumeMounts:
        - name: config-volume
          mountPath: /config
  volumes:
    - name: config-volume
      configMap:
        name: my-config
  restartPolicy: Never
```

## Secrets

For passwords, security tokens, or other types of private keys

Secrets enable container images to be created without bundling sensitive data

Secrets are exposed to Pods via explicit declaration in Pod manifests and the Kubernetes API

Kubernetes secrets API provides an application-centric mechanism for exposing sensitive configuration information to applications in a way that’s easy to audit and leverages native OS isolation primitives

Warning - By default, Kubernetes secrets are stored in plain text in the etcd storage for the cluster
- Anyone who has cluster administration rights in your cluster will be able to read all of the secrets in the cluster
- In recent versions of Kubernetes, support has been added for encrypting the secrets with a user-supplied key, generally integrated into a cloud key store
- Most cloud key stores have integration with Kubernetes flexible volumes, enabling you to skip Kubernetes secrets entirely and rely exclusively on the cloud provider’s key store

### Creating secrets

Secrets are created using the Kubernetes API or the kubectl command-line tool

```
$ curl -o kuard.crt  https://storage.googleapis.com/kuar-demo/kuard.crt
$ curl -o kuard.key https://storage.googleapis.com/kuar-demo/kuard.key
```

```
$ kubectl create secret generic kuard-tls \
  --from-file=kuard.crt \
  --from-file=kuard.key
```

```
$ kubectl describe secrets kuard-tls

Name:         kuard-tls
Namespace:    default
Labels:       <none>
Annotations:  <none>

Type:         Opaque

Data
====
kuard.crt:    1050 bytes
kuard.key:    1679 bytes
```

### Consuming secrets

Secrets can be consumed using the Kubernetes REST API by applications that know how to call that API directly. However, our goal is to keep applications portable. Not only should they run well in Kubernetes, but they should run, unmodified, on other platforms

Instead of accessing secrets through the API server, we can use a *secrets volume*

#### Secrets Volumes

Secret data can be exposed to Pods using the secrets volume type. Secrets volumes are managed by the kubelet and are created at Pod creation time. Secrets are stored on tmpfs volumes (aka RAM disks), and as such are not written to disk on nodes

Each data element of a secret is stored in a separate file under the target mount point specified in the volume mount. The kuard-tls secret contains two data elements: kuard.crt and kuard.key. Mounting the kuard-tls secrets volume to /tls results in the following files:

```
/tls/kuard.crt
/tls/kuard.key
```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: kuard-tls
spec:
  containers:
    - name: kuard-tls
      image: gcr.io/kuar-demo/kuard-amd64:blue
      imagePullPolicy: Always
      volumeMounts:
      - name: tls-certs
        mountPath: "/tls"
        readOnly: true
  volumes:
    - name: tls-certs
      secret:
        secretName: kuard-tls
```

`$ kubectl apply -f kuard-secret.yaml`

`$ kubectl port-forward kuard-tls 8443:8443`

### Private Docker Registries

A special use case for secrets is to store access credentials for private Docker registries. Kubernetes supports using images stored on private registries, but access to those images requires credentials. Private images can be stored across one or more private registries. This presents a challenge for managing credentials for each private registry on every possible node in the cluster

*Image pull secrets* leverage the secrets API to automate the distribution of private registry credentials. Image pull secrets are stored just like normal secrets but are consumed through the `spec.imagePullSecrets` Pod specification field

```
$ kubectl create secret docker-registry my-image-pull-secret \
  --docker-username=<username> \
  --docker-password=<password> \
  --docker-email=<email-address>
```

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: kuard-tls
spec:
  containers:
    - name: kuard-tls
      image: gcr.io/kuar-demo/kuard-amd64:blue
      imagePullPolicy: Always
      volumeMounts:
      - name: tls-certs
        mountPath: "/tls"
        readOnly: true
  imagePullSecrets:
  - name:  my-image-pull-secret
  volumes:
    - name: tls-certs
      secret:
        secretName: kuard-tls
```

If you are repeatedly pulling from the same registry, you can add the secrets to the default service account associated with each Pod to avoid having to specify the secrets in every Pod you create

## Naming Constraints

The key names for data items inside of a secret or ConfigMap are defined to map to valid environment variable names. They may begin with a dot followed by a letter or number. Following characters include dots, dashes, and underscores. Dots cannot be repeated and dots and underscores or dashes cannot be adjacent to each other. More formally, this means that they must conform to the regular expression `^[.[?[a-zAZ0-9[([.[?[a-zA-Z0-9[+[-_a-zA-Z0-9[?)*$.`

When selecting a key name, consider that these keys can be exposed to Pods via a volume mount. Pick a name that is going to make sense when specified on a command line or in a config file. Storing a TLS key as key.pem is more clear than tls-key when configuring applications to access secrets

ConfigMap data values are simple UTF-8 text specified directly in the manifest. As of Kubernetes 1.6, ConfigMaps are unable to store binary data

Secret data values hold arbitrary data encoded using base64. The use of base64 encoding makes it possible to store binary data. This does, however, make it more difficult to manage secrets that are stored in YAML files as the base64-encoded value must be put in the YAML. Note that the maximum size for a ConfigMap or secret is 1 MB

## Managing ConfigMaps and Secrets

### Listing

`kubectl get secrets`

`kubectl get configmaps`

`kubectl describe configmap my-config`

`kubectl get configmap my-config -o yaml or kubectl get secret kuard-tls -o yaml`

### Creating

`kubectl create secret generic`

`kubectl create configmap`

Arguments:
- `--from-file=<filename>`
- `--from-file=<key>=<filename>`
- `from-file=<directory>`
- `--from-literal=<key>=<value>`

### Updating

You can update a ConfigMap or secret and have it reflected in running programs. There is no need to restart if the application is configured to reread configuration values. This is a rare feature but might be something you put in your own applications.

The following are three ways to update ConfigMaps or secrets:

#### Update from File

If you have a manifest for your ConfigMap or secret, you can just edit it directly and push a new version with `kubectl replace -f <filename>`. You can also use `kubectl apply -f <filename>` if you previously created the resource with kubectl apply

Due to the way that datafiles are encoded into these objects, updating a configuration can be a bit cumbersome as there is no provision in kubectl to load data from an external file. The data must be stored directly in the YAML manifest

The most common use case is when the ConfigMap is defined as part of a directory or list of resources and everything is created and updated together. Oftentimes these manifests will be checked into source control

WARNING - It is generally a bad idea to check secret YAML files into source control. It is too easy to push these files someplace public and leak your secrets

#### Recreate and Update

If you store the inputs into your ConfigMaps or secrets as separate files on disk (as opposed to embedded into YAML directly), you can use kubectl to recreate the manifest and then use it to update the object

```
$ kubectl create secret generic kuard-tls \
  --from-file=kuard.crt --from-file=kuard.key \
  --dry-run -o yaml | kubectl replace -f -
```

This command line first creates a new secret with the same name as our existing secret. If we just stopped there, the Kubernetes API server would return an error complaining that we are trying to create a secret that already exists. Instead, we tell kubectl not to actually send the data to the server but instead to dump the YAML that it would have sent to the API server to stdout. We then pipe that to kubectl replace and use -f - to tell it to read from stdin. In this way, we can update a secret from files on disk without having to manually base64-encode data

#### Edit Current Version

`kubectl edit configmap my-config`

You should see the ConfigMap definition in your editor. Make your desired changes and then save and close your editor. The new version of the object will be pushed to the Kubernetes API server

#### Live Updates

Once a ConfigMap or secret is updated using the API, it’ll be automatically pushed to all volumes that use that ConfigMap or secret. It may take a few seconds, but the file listing and contents of the files, as seen by kuard, will be updated with these new values. Using this live update feature you can update the configuration of applications without restarting them

Currently there is no built-in way to signal an application when a new version of a ConfigMap is deployed. It is up to the application (or some helper script) to look for the config files to change and reload them

## Summary

ConfigMaps and secrets are a great way to provide dynamic configuration in your application. They allow you to create a container image (and Pod definition) once and reuse it in different contexts. This can include using the exact same image as you move from dev to staging to production. It can also include using a single image across multiple teams and services. Separating configuration from application code will make your applications more reliable and reusable