# Chapter 12 - DI Container Introduction

A DI Container is an optional tool that you can use to implement a lot of the general-purpose infrastructure that you would otherwise have to implement if you were using Pure DI.

**DEFINITION** A DI Container is a software library that provides DI functionality and automates many of the tasks involved in Object Composition, Interception, and Lifetime Management. It’s an engine that resolves and manages object graphs.

Autofac is a DI Container with a fairly pattern-conforming API. Assuming you already have an Autofac container instance, you can resolve a controller by supplying the requested type:

```
var controller = (HomeController)container.Resolve(typeof(HomeController));
```

Many of the DI Containers have APIs that are similar to Autofac’s. The corresponding code for Simple Injector looks nearly identical to Autofac’s, even though instances are resolved using the SimpleInjector.Container class. With Simple Injector, the previous code would look like this:

```
controller = (HomeController)container.GetInstance(typeof(HomeController));
```

**DEFINITION** Auto-Wiring is the ability to automatically compose an object graph from maps between Abstractions and concrete types by making use of type information supplied by the compiler and the Common Language Runtime (CLR).

**IMPORTANT** When you start using a DI Container, it’s not required that you abandon hand wiring object graphs altogether.

Although the Resolve method is where most of the action happens, you should expect to spend most of your time with a DI Container’s configuration API. Resolving object graphs is, after all, a single method call.

## DI Configuration Styles

### Configuration files

Mappings are specified in configuration files (typically in XML or JSON format)

Advantages
- Supports replacement without recompilation

Disadvantages
- No compile-time checks
- Verbose and brittle

### Configuration as code

Code explicitly determines mappings

Advantages
- Compile-time checks
- High degree of control

Disadvantages
- No support for replacement without recompilation

### Auto-registration

Rules are used to locate suitable components using reflection and to build the mappings.

Advantages
- Supports replacement without recompilation
- Less effort required
- Helps enforce conventions to make a code base more consistent

Disadvantages
- No compile-time checks
- Less control
- May seem more abstract at first

**IMPORTANT** You shouldn’t go back and reconfigure the container once you’ve started resolving object graphs — that will only give you grief. This is related to the Register Resolve Release pattern (https://mng.bz/D8Ew).

**NOTE** In recent years, JSON has also become a popular way of expressing configurations. The format is cleaner and easier to read than XML, but it still exhibits the same characteristics: it’s as brittle and verbose as XML.

**IMPORTANT** Configuration files are as much a part of your Composition Root as is Configuration as Code and Auto-Registration. Using configuration files, therefore, doesn’t make your Composition Root smaller, it just moves it. Use configuration files only for those parts of your DI configuration that require late binding. Prefer Configuration as Code or Auto-Registration in all other parts of your configuration.

**WARNING** As your application grows in size and complexity, so will your configuration file. It can grow to become a real stumbling block. This is because it models coding concepts such as classes, parameters, and such, but without the benefits of the compiler, debugging options, and so forth. Configuration files tend to become brittle and opaque to errors, so only use this approach when you need late binding.

**TIP** Although configuration files can work in a small application, or when used for small portions of your application, they don’t scale. Avoid using configuration files as your default method of DI configuration. As we’ll discuss in section 12.3, use either Pure DI or Auto-Registration.

**DEFINITION** In the context of DI Containers, Configuration as Code allows the container’s configuration to be stored as source code. Each mapping between an Abstraction and a particular implementation is expressed explicitly and directly in code.

**TIP** Prefer Configuration as Code over configuration files unless you need late binding. The compiler can be helpful, and the Visual Studio build system automatically copies all required assemblies to the output folder. And if you do need late binding, only use a configuration file for the parts of the configuration that need to be late bound, which is typically just a tiny subset of the types in the entire application.

Not only is Configuration as Code much more compact than configurations expressed in a configuration file, it also enjoys compiler support. The type arguments used in listing 12.8 represent real types that the compiler checks. Generics go even a step further, because the use of generic type constraints such as Microsoft’s API applies allows the compiler to check whether the supplied concrete type matches the Abstraction. If a conversion isn’t possible, the code won’t compile.

Although Configuration as Code is safe and easy to use, it still requires more maintenance than you might like. Every time you add a new type to an application, you must also remember to register it — and many registrations end up being similar. Auto-Registration addresses this issue.

**DEFINITION** Auto-Registration is the ability to automatically register components in a container by scanning one or more assemblies for implementations of desired Abstractions, based on a certain convention. Auto-Registration is sometimes referred to as Batch Registration or Assembly Scanning.

**TIP** Convention over Configuration has more advantages than just supporting DI configuration. It makes your code more consistent, because it automatically works, as long as you follow your conventions.

## When to use a DI Container

### Using third-party libraries involves costs and risks

When a library is free in a monetary sense, we developers often tend to ignore the other costs involved in using it. A DI Container might be considered a Stable Dependency (section 1.3.1), so from a DI perspective, using one isn’t an issue. But there are other concerns to consider. As with any third-party library, using a DI Container comes with costs and risks.

The most obvious cost of any library is its learning curve — it takes time to learn to use a new library. You have to learn its API, its behavior, its quirks, and its limitations. When you’re with a team of developers, most of them will have to understand how to work with that library in one way or another. Having just one developer that knows how to work with the tool might save costs in the short run, but such a practice is in itself a liability to the continuity of your project

Besides the direct cost of learning to work with a library, there are risks involved in taking a dependency on such a library. One risk is that the developers stop maintaining and supporting a library you’re using. When such an event occurs, it introduces extra costs to the project because it can force you to switch libraries. In that case, you’re paying the previously discussed learning costs all over again with the additional costs of migrating and testing the application again.

**TIP** Because of these costs and risks, care should be taken in selecting the right libraries for your project. When starting a new project, to mitigate the risks, it’s therefore advisable to limit the amount of external libraries your team needs to become familiar with.

**Don't build your own DI container**

The major advantage of Pure DI is that it’s easy to learn. You don’t have to learn the API of any DI Container and, although individual classes still use DI, once you find the Composition Root, it’ll be evident what’s going on and how object graphs are constructed. Although newer IDEs make this less of a problem, it can be difficult for a new developer on a team to get a sense of the constructed object graph and to find the implementation for a class’s Dependency when a DI Container is used.

With Pure DI, this is less of a problem, because object graph construction is hard coded in the Composition Root. Besides being easier to learn, Pure DI gives you a shorter feedback cycle in case there’s an error in your composition of objects.

**IMPORTANT** Pure DI has a big advantage that’s often overlooked: it’s strongly typed. This allows the compiler to provide feedback about correctness, which is the fastest feedback that you can get.

If you use a DI Container’s Configuration as Code abilities (as discussed in section 12.2.2), explicitly registering each and every component using the container’s API, you lose the rapid feedback from strong typing. On the other hand, the maintenance burden is also likely to drop because of Auto-Wiring. Still, you’ll need to register each new class when you introduce it, which is a linear growth, and you and your team have to learn the specific API of that container. But even if you’re already familiar with its API, there’s still the risk of having to replace it someday. You might lose more than you gain.

Ultimately, if you can wield a DI Container in a sufficiently sophisticated way, you can use it to define a set of conventions using Auto-Registration (as discussed in section 12.2.3). These conventions define a rule set that your code should adhere to, and as long as you stick to those rules, things just work. The container drops to the background, and you rarely need to touch it.

**IMPORTANT** The use of Convention over Configuration using Auto-Registration can minimize the amount of maintenance on the Composition Root to almost zero.

Auto-Registration takes time to learn, and is weakly typed, but, if done right, it enables you to focus on code that adds value instead of infrastructure. An additional advantage is that it creates a positive feedback mechanism, forcing a team to produce code that’s consistent with the conventions. Figure 12.6 visualizes the trade-off between Pure DI and using a DI Container.

As we stated in section 12.2.4, none of the available approaches are mutually exclusive. Although you might find a single Composition Root to contain a mix of all configuration styles, a Composition Root should either be focused around Pure DI with, perhaps, a few late-bound types, or around Auto-Registration with, optionally, a limited amount of Configuration as Code, Pure DI, and configuration files. A Composition Root that focuses around Configuration as Code is pointless and should therefore be avoided.

The question then becomes this: when should you choose Pure DI, and when should you use Auto-Registration? We, unfortunately, can’t give any hard numbers on this. It depends on the size of the project, the amount of experience you and your team have with a DI Container, and the calculation of risk.

In general, though, you should use Pure DI for Composition Roots that are small and switch to Auto-Registration when maintaining such a Composition Root becomes a problem. Bigger applications with many classes that can be captured by several conventions can benefit from using Auto-Registration.

The other thing we won’t tell you is which DI Container to choose. Selecting a DI Container involves more than technical evaluation. You must also evaluate whether the licensing model is acceptable, whether you trust the people or organization that develops and maintains the DI Container, how it fits into your organization’s IT strategy, and so on. Your search for the right DI Container also shouldn’t be limited to the containers listed in this book. For example, many excellent DI Containers for the .NET platform are available to choose from.

A DI Container can be a helpful tool if you use it correctly. The most important thing to understand is that the use of DI in no way depends on the use of a DI Container. An application can be made from many loosely coupled classes and modules, and none of these modules knows anything about a container. The most effective way to make sure that application code is unaware of any DI Container is by limiting its use to the Composition Root. This prevents you from inadvertently applying the Service Locator anti-pattern, because it constrains the container to a small, isolated area of the code.

Used in this way, a DI Container becomes an engine that takes care of part of the application’s infrastructure. It composes object graphs based on its configuration. This can be particularly beneficial if you employ Convention over Configuration. If suitably implemented, it can take care of composing object graphs, and you can concentrate your efforts on implementing new features. The container will automatically discover new classes that follow the established conventions and make them available to consumers. The final three chapters of this book cover Autofac (chapter 13), Simple Injector (chapter 14), and Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection (chapter 15).