# Chapter 11 - Tool-based Aspect-Oriented Programming

## Dynamic Interception

Dynamic Interception is an Aspect-Oriented Programming (AOP) technique that automates the generation of Decorators to be emitted at runtime. Aspects are written as Interceptors, which are injected into a runtime-generated Decorator.

Dynamic Interception might be a good temporary solution until the right time arrives to start making the kinds of improvements discussed in the last chapter.

Compile-time weaving is the opposite of DI, and we consider it to be an anti-pattern. We feel it’s important, however, to include a discussion on compile-time weaving, because it’s a well-known form of AOP, and we want to make it clear that it isn’t a viable alternative to DI.

Figure 11.1 A dynamic Interception library generates a Decorator class at runtime. This happens once per given Abstraction (in this case, for IRepo). After the generation process completes, you can request that the Interception library create new instances of that Decorator for you, while you supply both the target and the interceptor.

**NOTE** Castle Dynamic Proxy is the de facto standard tool for dynamic Interception in .NET. It’s free and open source. In fact, most DI Containers use it under the hood for their dynamic Interception functionality. Other dynamic Interception tools are available, but Castle is mature and has stood the test of time, so we’ll focus on Castle for this discussion.

**TIP** For good performance, Castle.DynamicProxy.ProxyGenerator should typically be created once and cached for the lifetime of the application.

When we compare the tool-based AOP approach of dynamic Interception to the AOP by design approach discussed in the previous chapter, we find a number of similarities between the two:
- Each enables you to address Cross-Cutting Concerns when you program against Abstractions.
- As with plain old Decorators, Interceptors can use Constructor Injection, which makes them DI-friendly and decoupled from the code they’re decorating. These characteristics allow both your business code and your aspects to be easily tested.
- Aspects can be centralized in the Composition Root, which prevents code duplication, and in case your Visual Studio solution contains multiple applications, it allows the aspects to be applied in one Composition Root, but not the other.

### Disadvantages of Dynamic Interception

- *Loss of compile-time support* - Interception code tends to be more complicated than a Decorator, which makes it harder to read and maintain.
- *Aspects are tighly coupled to the tooling* - This coupling makes it harder to test and forces the Interceptor to be part of the Composition Root in order to prevent other assemblies from requiring a Dependency on the dynamic Interception library.
- *Not universally applicable* - Aspects can only be applied at the boundaries of methods that are virtual or abstract, such as methods that are part of an interface definition.
- *Doesn’t fix underlying design problems* - You still end up with a system that’s only marginally more and considerably less maintainable than a more SOLID-based design.

## Compile-time weaving

Compile-time weaving is a common AOP technique that alters this compilation process. It uses special tools to read a compiled assembly produced by our (C#) compiler, modifies it, and writes it back to disk, effectively replacing the original assembly.

But, as alluring as it may seem at first, when applied to Volatile Dependencies, the use of compile-time weaving comes with issues that make this technique problematic from a maintainability perspective. Because of these downsides, as explained throughout this section, we consider compile-time weaving to be the opposite of DI — it’s a DI anti-pattern.

**IMPORTANT** Compile-time weaving isn’t a desirable method of applying AOP for Volatile Dependencies. Favor applying the SOLID principles, or fall back to dynamic Interception if that isn’t possible.

PostSharp - https://www.postsharp.net

### Disadvantages of Compile-Time Weaving

- *DI-unfriendly* - There’s no good way to inject Volatile Dependencies into compile-time weaving aspects. The alternatives cause Temporal Coupling, Captive Dependencies, and Interdependent Tests.
- *Compile-time coupling* - Aspects are woven in at compile time, making it impossible to call code without the aspect applied. This complicates testing and reduces flexibility.

When it comes to applying Cross-Cutting Concerns, you’ll find yourself regularly working with Volatile Dependencies. As you learned in chapter 1, Volatile Dependencies are the focal point of DI. With Volatile Dependencies, your default choice should be to use Constructor Injection, because it statically defines the list of required Dependencies. Unfortunately, it isn’t possible to use Constructor Injection with compile-time weaving aspects.

Favor applying SOLID principles, falling back to dynamic Interception if that isn’t possible.